---
layout: post
title: Lakeland Trails Hawkshead (16km Challenge)
categories: [Race reports]
image: hawkshead-2019.jpg
tags: [Hawkshead, Lake District, Lakeland Trails, Trail and Fell]
---
One of the joys of fell and trail running are those days where the world recedes into the background; your mind focusses entirely on the ground beneath your feet and the terrain still to come, your body in an almost symbitoic relationship with nature. Saturday was not one of those days.

My first ever trail race, not quite three years ago, was a Lakeland Trails event and I've not looked back since in my love for trail running or the Lake District. These runs have a special place in my heart - there's a great atmosphere, a variety of events and mesmerising scenery.

In that sense Saturday was no different. All of the ingredients were there: Pete Bland sports with the van, a number of food vendors, families enjoying the day, the cheery MC keeping things on track. 

I had entered the 16k challenge and know that on a good day I should be in the top ten places, so I straightaway tagged onto the two front runners for a quick first kilometre or so. The route leads around the edge of Hawkshead and starts to climb steeply in the second kilometre, it was at this point that I first realised I didn't have anything in my legs. I couldn't get my head in the game and my legs and lungs weren't keen to cooperate either.

I dug deep and tried to maintain some pace in the climb, having a brief chat with another runner as he overtook but I couldn't shake the heavy feeling in the legs. There's no sound louder than the footsteps of a runner about to pass you when you're desperately pushing to keep going.

After two kilometres of climbing the course starts to undulate before dropping down and passing the Cuckoo Brow Inn in Far Sawrey. There's a tight left that sends you up another hill towards the half way point where a marshal at the gate shouted, 'fourteenth, steep and rocky downhill'. 

For a moment something akin to hope flickered through my mind. If others took the marshal's warning as a note of caution, I'd take it as an invitation to the party. I threw myself into the downhill with as much recklesness as I could find. The great Emil Zatopek once said that when you're tiring you should change pace and go faster. The downhill provided just that, leaping from rock to rock and overtaking a couple of the guys in front. It was by far the most exhilirating part of an otherwise tough run.

Things flatten out for a short while along the shore of Lake Windermere, with boats bobbing on the current, before another left turn and a sign indicates that you're about to start the coffin trail. The coffin trail is a couple of kilometres in length and two hundred metres of elevation gain and boy, do you feel it.

I was soon passed by the runners I'd gained on during the downhill and then several more. On a good day I know I could have done the climb a lot quicker but tired legs and mental fatigue were a combination I just couldn't fight through on the day. 
