The Ring of Steall. The name alone is enough to cause a sharp intake of breath, and that's before you stand at the start of the skyrace and look up at the Mamores ridge towering above you.

Starting at Kinlochleven, The race is the final race in the Salomon Golden Trails World Series. It's billed as the most technical and attracts the biggest names in mountain running.

I can barely contain my excitement as I line up in the start pen and look up with awe at the mountains that await. This is what I built my whole season around. 

I pushed hard at the Chevy knowing I needed hills in my legs. My first thought on spraining my ankle was that I dreaded missing this race. And every length in the pool when I couldn't run was with this moment in mind.

A thousand runners flow across the start line like a torrent, a quick left and a right onto the main road through town. Within minutes we've joined the West Highland way and are starting up the first ascent. There's some undulations through the forest before the real climb starts and we form a long line pushing our way up. The ground is boggy and rocky and the ascent unrelenting for a thousand metres up to Sgurr an Iubhair.

From their you're straight onto the Devil's ridge. I scan the skyline, drinking in the beauty of it all, fix my eyes on the next few metres of ground, and off we go. It felt a lot more runnable than I expected and it's a great relief after the climb. About half way across the race route drops to the west of the arete and you're left to pull yourself up through Bad Step. It's an easy enough move but breathtaking to take on at pace. 

With that slight scramble out of the way it's a push towards the summit of Sgurr a'Mhaim, the first Munro of the race. It's the highest mountain I've ran so far but there's no time for sightseeing as we set off down the scree at the top of the descent. 

Scree running is a strange sensation. Every time you put a foot down the stones give way beneath you and you slide on, surfing the momentum for a moment before taking another stride. 

I started the descent with boundless enthusiasm but as the scree became rocks and bog a third of the way down my body started to slow. Dropping a thousand metres in a single descent is harsh on your quads and it's with great relief that we hit the floor of the Glen and the support station.

A glance at my watch tells me I'm behind target, yet I know in my head I've given it every ounce. This race is brutal. I down two beakers of Red Bull mixed with water and eat a couple of cold boiled potatoes and off we go again.

It's up and down stuff along the Glen to Steall Falls where we wade through the river. It's the last water we'll get and many runners pause mid-river and fill up bottles and flasks. 

An Gearanach towers above you and a steep, unrelenting, ascent begins. I get talking to another runner about half way up and fifteen minutes of chat is enough to take my mind off the pain in my legs for a while. Eventually I have to pause for a few moments and gather myself. There'd be no point in quitting now, it'd be as hard to give up and find your way down as it would to continue.

An Gearanach is our second Munro and with it the last of the big climbs is done. There's still a significant amount of elevation to though and it's with tired legs that I set out along the ridge. There's a tasty little scramble around An Garbhanach and it's here that I come unstuck.

It's a grade one scramble and the type of move I'd normally do without thinking, but with over two thousand metres of climbing in my legs things don't go to plan. I have my arms spread in a firm hold when my foot misses its mark and I grapple to get more than my left toe onto the narrow ledge. As I try to regain my cool my right leg starts to cramp and I look down – down beyond my feet, down over a thousand feet to the valley below. 

I barked an instruction at my leg to pack it in and pull myself across the rockface. Within a few seconds I was back on the top of the ridge and wondering if I was as close to going over as it had felt.

As I consider what just happened, we're greeted by the sound of bagpipes. Flower of Scotland drifts down the short, steep, and rocky climb to the summit of Stob Coire a' Chàirn. It's an emotional moment as I finally hit the top and stop to applaud the piper, who in turn stops blowing to bellow out, 'well done, Pete, keep going'.

The pace picks up for a while and there's a nice little descent before the final climb of the day. It's 150 metres of vert to the summit and if your hands aren't on your knees, they're on rocks to pull yourself up. 

As we summit Am Bodach, our fourth and final Munro of the day, I break into a broad smile and thrust my arms skyward. It's all down hill from here.

The top of the descent brought with it the brief and fleeting hope of a burst of speed but it soon became obvious my legs had gone. I had nothing left. I was often shin deep in bogs, slipping on rocks, and couldn't get my footwork right. I pushed as hard as I could but nothing extra came.

Finally, with time ticking on, I hit the road back into Kinlochleven. I'd thought this would be an easy finish but my legs refuse to move and I limp along the footpath for a while. I'm desperate to make it under 6:30 but the tank seems to be empty.

I try and fail to run but manage to walk with intent for a minute until a passing runner tells me I can do it. Sometimes that's all you need. I pick up into a jog and approach the bridge. Hearing the crowd cheer and the sound of cowbells I start to run properly again.

As I round the final corner the finish line clock turns 6:29:52. Not today. Oh no. From somewhere deep inside I summon my hundred metre pace and sprint over the line, spurred on by the crowd. I make it and moments later I'm bent double next to a barrier trying to breathe again.

The Ring of Steall is undoubtedly the most brutal race I've ever attempted. It's technical and unforgiving. 28.5km (18 miles), 2,700 metres of elevation gain, four Munros, two magnificent ridges, and one incredible feeling to finish.

At the end of the day it was incredibly hard and incredibly hot. I didn't fuel enough – apart from the potatoes at the support point I only took two gels and some haribo, whoops – and the niggles and injuries this year have undermined my training. All in all, I'm really pleased to have managed it but there's some unfinished business there for a future date.
