There are many things that I find frustrating about the Great North Run. It's expensive, over commercialised and mainly ran on dual carriageways. There are too many people and the t-shirts are cheap. But the moment I hear the gun, and the opening bars of Local Hero come from the speakers, all frustrations are forgotten.

I'd been having a golden spell in early summer. In eight days I ran personal bests for 5k, 10k and the Chevy Chase. Everything seemed to be falling into place right until the moment I fell, on my face, at the Turner Landscape. As my ankle turned over on itself, I saw my hopes of a quick summer disappear.

It's been a tough five weeks since. I spent two weeks flailing around attempting to swim before a gradual return to running. I squeezed into my pen on Sunday having done nothing longer than 10k since before my injury and at a real low point fitness wise.

The atmosphere is always fantastic at the start line and I arrived in time to see the phenomenal Brigid Kosgei leading out the elite women. As the excitement built I started to wrestle with what pace to set off at. Before the sprain I was aiming for sub 1:30 but I know that I'm way off that now. 

We're over the line pretty quickly and I set off at 4:30/km, certain I can't sustain it, yet hoping that by some miracle I can. The spectators on the Tyne Bridge are pushing onto the road and the noise is immense as we surge across it. 

I always joke that the Great North Run is a good first and last mile with eleven boring miles in-between. In terms of the course, that's entirely accurate. The thing that brings it to life are the people along the way; children leaning over the railings offering high fives and ice pops, local bands, and banners galore.

Whether by grace or adrenaline, my ankle didn't hurt at all and I pushed on as hard as I could. My glutes were feeling pretty weak from the lack of training though and as the route passed through Jarrow I started to struggle. 

I needed to prove to myself that I could grind out a time in bad circumstances. Turning right up onto the John Reid Road felt like attacking a mountain - which doesn't bode well for the actual mountain run I'll be tackling in two weeks. It's always good to see my parents in the crowd on the hill, and there were some other familiar faces too.

By the ten mile mark I'd given up on coming in under 1:40 and started to have a little more fun with the crowds. They're vocal all the way, but it's the little interactions that make it special; doing the mobot in response to a banner, high-fiving Elvis, responding to cheers.

By the time I hit the seafront again I'm ready to pick up the pace once more. I found a second wind and before I know it the finish line was in view. It's amazing what the sound of a solid wall of cheering geordies can do for your motivation.

With about six hundred metres left I spotted a guy start to lose his legs. He teetered into the barriers and the man next to him reached out to support him. We ran alongside him a little way until it was clear he couldn't get across on his own. He swayed unresponsively, eyes closed, wobbling forwards. The other runner took one of his arms, so I took the other and we started to guide him home. 

As you come along the sea front there's a massive roar and the road is lined with soldiers. We kept the guy upright and somehow, for a man who I'm not even sure was conscious by this point, he kept moving. As we neared the finish line a medic ran toward us and put his arm around the shoulder to see him over the line.

Freed up I then decided on a sprint finish to get me in in 1:42. It's my slowest Great North Run to date, but I proved I could grind out a time and that my ankle could hold up in race conditions.

