---
layout: post
title: Losing the plot - Chevy Chase 2019
image: coledale-horseshoe-first-climb.jpg
alt: OS Map marked with the Chevy Chase and race number
categories: [Race reports]
tags: [Fell running, Chevy Chase, Trail and Fell]
---

There are a few basic elements of a good narrative — you have a character, some conflict or adversity, and then a resolution. The thing that keeps us reading, watching or listening is the tension between those things.

The writers of the medieval Ballad of the Chevy Chase understood this. They recounted a tale of Harry Hotspur, Earl of Northumberland going on a hunt in the Cheviot Hills. The Scottish Earl Douglas saw this as an invasion and set off in pursuit. In the following Battle, Douglas lost his life. It had all those elements of a good story.

Seven centuries later, competing in the 63rd Chevy Chase fell race, I expected a similarly epic story — though hopefully without a death at the end. What more would you expect from a race steeped in such heritage? I was already penning a race report in my head, usually ending with me struggling and behind target but mustering a heroic climb out of Hell’s Path to scrape by with a second to spare.

The Chevy is a wonderful race. Leaving Wooler you cross the hill on the common and then have a rapid descent to Carey Burn. There follows a long and sustained climb up to Broadsruther and Cheviot Knee. The ascent up the rest of Cheviot is a tale of two halves. It starts with about two kilometres of steep climb — hands on knees, power hiking — before flattening out and giving you a quick dash over the paving slabs to the trig point on the summit.

From Cheviot Summit the next checkpoint is the summit of Hedgehope. You choose your own route and there are a few options — there’s the long way round via Comb Fell, with less ascent and descent, I saw one competitor double back the way we’d came, but for most the solution is simple: hang a left off the summit and launch yourself down the steep side.

There's Harthope Burn to cross at the bottom but most of the time you don't even have to wet your feet. There's a slog up through the ferns to the summit of Hedgehope before you head back towards Wooler. There's a short technical section along Carey Burn before the final ascent of the race - the aptly named Hell's Path, and a couple of quick miles back to the Youth Hostel finish line.

In previous years I've emerged from the Chevy with a story to tell, having never quite hit my target and always had to fight the desire to quit. This year, however, there's no story: I was hoping to scrape in under four hours but didn't know if I was capable. 

By the top of Cheviot I was seven minutes ahead of target and I dropped into the valley expecting a slow down that never came. I summited Hedgehope twelve minutes ahead and by the time I set off up Hell's path that was seventeen.

It's not that my legs didn't hurt, they did. It's not that I didn't doubt, because I certainly did. But this time the pain seemed to only make me quicker, as though some external force was propelling me. 

As I sprinted along the path behind the hostel I realised I could beat my target by twenty minutes. I approached the runner in front, who could've easily and fairly held me up on the single track but instead stepped aside to let me pass. I crossed the line in 3:39:59.

The thing is, this isn't the race story I'm going to relish telling. I love telling running stories but they only really work when there's a struggle. Explaining how you ran into a 75mph headwind with twisted ankles and wanted to crawl into a ditch and cry is much more compelling than simply saying, "it went better than expected and nothing went wrong".

I guess that Paul of Tarsus was on point in saying, "we glory in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance; perseverance, character; and character, hope". 
