---
layout: post
title: Doing hard things
image: vaporfly.jpg
categories: [Training]
tags: [Training, Marathon]
---

On Sunday morning, at about 9:59, I'll take a moment to remember JFK. It's not his birthday or the anniversary of his assasination or anything like that; it's the start of the Edinbirgh Marathon. As I toe the line, as close to the front of my pen as I can be, I'll invariably think of his 1962 speech at Rice University. 

Contrary to what some of my recent performances may suggest, I wasn't there in person.

Addressing the American people, he spoke about going to the moon not because it was easy but because it was hard.

>We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard; because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others, too.

As cliched as that might sound, thinking of that at the start of a marathon helps me focus. Training for a marathon is hard. Your body takes a pounding, you wrestle with the will to continue or walk away. Sometimes you get injured. You turn down social invites in order to spend three hours running in miserable weather. I mean, sensible people just don't do this with their lives. 

Then you have race day itself. As I think about the race ahead I know that I will most likely struggle with pain and battle against the desire to walk away. At somepoint, probably a little before the twenty mile mark, my brain will tell my legs that we don't have enough energy to keep going and they should stop. I will then spend the next however long desperately trying to overule my brain and convince my legs of the truth: they do have the energy and they can keep going.

Doing a marathon is just hard. Whichever way you look at it. Whether you're flying around, pushing for your BQ, or pressing through a few yards ahead of sweeper truck, it's just bloody hard work.

And that's why we do it, really. If it was easy we'd probably not bother. So I think of JFK's speech and remember that sentiment. Sure, we're not going to the moon, but we're pushing our bodies towards a goal that takes the best of our energies and skills.

I don't really know what to expect from Sunday. My calves have seen better days.
