---
layout: post
title: The Dark Mud Rises
image: nxc2020-1a.jpg
alt: Splashing through the clart
categories: [Race reports]
tags: [Cross Country]
---
Clarty. There's no better word to describe the conditions at Saturday's National Cross Country ChampionshipClarty. There's no better word to describe the conditions at Saturday's National Cross Country Championships. It was right clarty. Back to back winter storms had seen fit to empty the heavens, leaving the course a mess of mud and sludge. Or, as I like to think of it, perfect cross country conditions. 

This year's championships were at Wollaton Hall in Nottingham, used as Wayne Manor in The Dark Knight Rises. An Elizabethan Country House surrounded by 500 acres of park land, it makes a fantastic venue for racing. 

A good friend from the club had told me that I had to experience the nationals, and he was bang on. The atmosphere is great with thousands of runners coming from across the country. Tents spring up in club colours, with flags fluttering outside to show their crests.

There's ten races across the day, ranging from under thirteens to seniors. We arrived in plenty of time to watch some of the junior races. This was good, in that it gave an idea of what was to come. This was also bad, in that it gave an idea of what was to come.

While in the Harrier league cross country we start in waves, this is an all out race and the start is as exhilarating as it is bonkers. Almost two thousand men stood five deep along a huge start line, ready to take off as soon as the gun goes.

I went off as quick as I could manage, eager to get around the first corner and avoid any bottlenecking. I spent the rest of the first few minutes wondering if my increased training had made me much faster or if I would slow down. You already know the answer to that, and sure enough I settled in to a slower pace.

The course was fantastic, comprising four laps of ever increasing size and officially twelve kilometres – though everyone's watch said it was over thirteen.

It was a tape your shoes kind of day, anything to help keep them on your feet as you launched yourself calf deep through clag and clart. There were several sections where the only option was to run through puddles that had grown into ten food wide pools.

I'm finding in multi-terrain events I tend to fair better on the challenging parts at the moment. I lose ground on the flat and relatively dry, probably due to my lack of speed work, but make it up through the mud or up hill. 

By the time I passed the start line to begin my final lap, I could hear the commentator proclaiming the lightning like finish of Gateshead's Calum Johnson. He'd somehow managed to average 3:20/km around the whole course. Incredible stuff. 

As I tried to push up the hill to the back door of the Hall I noticed I was racing a guy with one shoe and one bare foot. He wasn't alone on a day where you saw shoes disappearing into the quagmire left, right and centre.

It's funny racing in a competition like this. I pushed myself hard the whole way and felt good about my pace given the conditions. And that's all that matters in a way - it felt like I gave it my best run. But finishing you realise just how good the standard is across the field. 


s. It was right clarty. Back to back winter storms had seen fit to empty the heavens, leaving the course a mess of mud and sludge. Or, as I like to think of it, perfect cross country conditions. 

This year's championships were at Wollaton Hall in Nottingham, used as Wayne Manor in The Dark Knight Rises. An Elizabethan Country House surrounded by 500 acres of park land, it makes a fantastic venue for racing. 

A good friend from the club had told me that I had to experience the nationals, and he was bang on. The atmosphere is great with 
