# Alnwick, not Elysium...
I always said no to Cross Country. Marathon training was my usual excuse, Saturday is long run day, but really I just remembered how crap it was at school running along the grassy cliff tops in the cold. 

This season though, I ran out of excuses. I’m not marathon training yet and my increasing enjoyment of the fells made me think cross country might be worth a try.

My first two outings have been in the harrier league. It turns out this cross country running lark is popular. Wrekenton proved to be a pretty dry and pleasant affair and then, as if to show just how grim things can be, Aykley Heads was a mud bath of epic proportions. We’re talking like the fields of Agincourt kind of muddy.

This weekend was the North Eastern Championships in Alnwick. It’s an impressive setting for a race, with the tent village that accompanies a cross country meet springing up in the pastures of the magnificent Alnwick Castle.

A warm up was definitely the right choice, but had the draw back of making me so aware of the cold I hid in the club tent until the whistle blew to assemble.

As is customary for cross country, the wind was blowing somewhere between a gail and a raging hoolie. The only acceptable topic of conversation before the start is whether you need a base layer and a hat, or whether the vest is enough. I imagine this is how Scott of the Arctic felt, only he made more sensible choices.

We’re tightly packed as the gun goes off and we stampede westwards, straight into the headwind for about a kilometre. There’d not been too much rain so the first section was mainly grass. A couple of hills follow and two gates in quick succession offer a good bit of ankle deep mud before we’re squeezed out onto a loose stone path for a quick section leading through the forest. 

As you come out of the forest there’s a down hill that completes the first lap; it was here that I first started to feel sluggish. I’d been running strong and then suddenly my legs just didn’t seem to have enough. My mind flooded with doubts as I struggled into the wind. I’ve been feeling slow for a few weeks and I started to have the quit urge. 

I mainly dragged myself around that second lap, feeling like I was constantly losing ground, until I hit the stone path again. It was there that I felt the sun filter through on my back and a moment of peaceful calm, the trees blocking out the wind. Everything seemed to click and, adrenaline kicking in, I forgot the world.

I lengthened my stride - the number one weapon in the lanky runner’s arsenal - and remembered Maximus is Gladiator: “If you find yourself alone, riding in green fields with the sun on your face, do not be troubled; for you are in Elysium.”

It was about twenty seconds later that I passed a break in the trees. The biting wind nigh on cut me in two, footsteps broke my reverie, and a runner from another club overtook me. Back to earth: You’re in Alnwick, lad, not Elysium.

Still, the adrenaline was going now and I started to feel the buzz. I pushed myself around the final lap
