Athletics, says the Daily Mail, is dying. It finds itself staring into the void that once contained its soul. The problem with the piece, apart from the needless melodrama of its language, is that it's wrong. If the writer is looking into the heart of a faceless corporation's performance unit for the soul of sport – they're looking in the wrong place. The Nike Oregon Project is one thing, the nationwide network of athletics and athletes is quite another.

I first pulled on my Heaton Harriers vest two and a half years ago. I already ran but thought a club might be good social running. During my first run Phil told me I'd take up to five mins off my 10k best within a few months. I wasn't convinced. But I was wrong. That summer I shredded it by over four minutes in one race. There was more to this running club life than cheery conversations and interval training.

This year for the first time I started to attend track and field and cross country. And it's there that I found the heart and soul of UK athletics. I found it doing a four point start in my second 100m sprint, when two fellow competitors in the same heat whispered across help so I didn't false start.

I saw it in action when a lad from the club smiled at me before the 3,000m and said – "don't worry about coming last, the most embarrassing thing is coming first." I did win the heat, but thankfully not by enough to suggest I'd lied to the organisers about my ability.

To look to something like the Oregon Project and suggest it is the place where you'd find the soul of athletics is ludicrous. This sport thrives. Hundreds of clubs across the country gather every week. Tens of thousands of people take part in ParkRun every weekend.

Volunteers do everything from setting out course markings to standing all day on cold mountain tops to marshal runners. When someone dies, they mourn their loss and celebrate their life. When someone at the club is in a stitch they help out.

All of this bubbles up through the infrastructure of UK athletics until you get to Dina Asher-Smith, of Blackheath and Bromley Harriers, winning 200m gold at the world championships. Or Laura Weightman, of Morpeth Harriers, running a great run in the 1500m. You'll still find her racing local races, along with Olympian Aly Dixon of the Sunderland Strollers.



